The Hesburgh Prairie is located directly across
the highway from the land that I now own.
I am not clear how my great grandmother and my
grandfather happened to move to the Tabor area.
They lived in a community called Devil's Jump in
Robertson County. Only the old timers know where
Devil's Jump is. I have never been there. I
understand the road is out and I have not tried to
locate it. But it is located in Roberson County and
at some time prior to the Civil War they must have
moved from there down to Brazos County.
A great deal is known about the Presnell family
because of a relative that did a genealogy on the
Prestons some years ago. We do know that they
originated in France as the Huguenots who
migrated to England and then were put out of
England because of their religious bent and came
to the United States and settled on the East Coast
and eventually to Alabama, and then to Texas.
There are many personals around the country
today, and they're all related in some way or
another.
In contrast to my mother's family, which had very
large families, two of them had ten children, and
two had six, and the other two had three each, My
father's family had two brothers, two sisters,
and a half-sister, but
his two brothers had no children at all. The oldest
of the boys was Charlie Presnell. He farmed across
the road from what we know as the old Presnell home
place. His farm is now in a trust that my brothers
and sisters owned and interested
in. This land was acquired by my father upon the
death of Charlie Preston.
We have preserved just one small portion of the
house that my Uncle Charlie lived in. We found a log
cabin within his residence that was built
probably back in the 1830s. We do not know who built
the log cabin, but it certainly dates back to being
the oldest log cabin in the county or in this area.
My brother was living there at the time and was
going to vet school and was up in the attic one day
trying to fish a wire through the wall and found out
the wall was solid. That led him to the discovery
that there was a log cabin within the house that had
been covered up and as a result was preserved. We
still have that log cabin and are in the process of
restoring it. Uncle Charlie was married to Mary
Peshak, and after her death, he married Susie
Mitchell McCallum. The youngest of the Pressmore
boys was Earl Pressmore.
He lived at home in the same house with his father,
where my father had been raised, and in later years
married Sue Benbow. Uncle Earl and Aunt Sue
continued to live at home with his father, J.K.
Preston. who my father ran his operation pretty
much out of the country store that I talked about
earlier. Uncle Earl was a farmer and rancher. Aunt
Sue taught elementary grades at Bowie Elementary
School in Bryan for many years. Later she taught at
the Tabor School and was my teacher in the sixth and
seventh grades. Uncle Charlie and Aunt Mary had no
children, and likewise, Uncle Earl and Aunt Sue
had no children. A sister of my father was Mara
Holden, who was married to Walter Holden. Walter
Holden was the equipment manager for the Texas A&M
University Athletic Department for many years.
They had two children.
Walter Jr. And I cannot recall the daughter's
name, although she was a ticket manager at the N. M.
A department for many years. I recall when I was in
the Commandant's office that she was a ticket
manager, and I was responsible for accounting for
all the tickets for the cadets that marched
through the gates to the home football games.
Consequently, we had numerous contacts during
those football seasons in the 60s. Another sister
of my father was Mary Kern. Aunt Mary was married to
August Kern, and they lived and had rental
property near the Travis Elementary School in
Bryan. Uncle August sold Watkins products, and he
had two children, Joe and Ruth. Ruth never married
and lives in a retirement home in Asheville, North
Carolina. Joe recently died and lived on the East
Coast most of his life. A half-sister was Tilly
Moore. Her family, as I recall, was a Chatham
family. She was married to, or she was a Chatham,
yes. She was married to Uncle John Moore, who was a
well-known schoolmaster and very active in
public education, and at one time was
superintendent of schools in Brazos County. They
had several children, three boys, Morris, Henry,
and Tillman. Tillman was the oldest of the boys and
followed in his dad's footsteps. He taught at the
college level in a couple of small colleges in
Texas during the Depression years and was later
with the Federal Civil Defense and Director of
Curriculum and Materiel at Crew Training Air
Force.
Tillman was instrumental in my staying at Tyndall
Air Force Base and returning to Texas A&M to do
graduate work. I also followed in Tillman's
footsteps at West Texas State University in 1953
when I took my first job there as a member of the
faculty. Tillman was a legend at West Texas State
and had provided an opportunity for many kids to go
to school that otherwise would not have been able
to attend during the Depression days when no one
had any money.
He was in charge of the farm operation and had a
number of the boys living on the farm and were able
to subsist by eating their own produce.
Tillman, or T.M. Moore, had a Ph.D. from Iowa State
and was anxious for me to attend that institution,
but I decided instead to return to Texas A&M and
ended up getting a master's degree here in about
1959. I'll have a little bit more to say about Dr.
T.M. Moore later and the influence that he had on my
life. This is chapter three titled On My Own. In
1953, when I graduated from Texas A&M University,
I was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the
U.S. Air Force and fully expected to report to
active duty within a few days. Actually, I had six
weeks from graduation time to the day I was
supposed to report to active duty. I took a job with
one of my professors for 30 days painting his
three-story home on Texas Avenue.
After I had completed that, just days before I was
to pack up and go off to my first tour of duty, first
duty station, I got orders that my orders, I got a
telegram that my orders had been canceled. I
immediately went to Texas A&M and met with the
military people here to see what they could tell me
what all this meant. They did not know, but they
said that because the Korean War was over that I
would probably be called a little later and that
because the war being over they had decided to
postpone calling some of us in, our whole class in
for that matter.
After I left the Office of the Commandant in
Military Sciences, Air Sciences, I went over to my
department, the Dairy Science Department, and
looked on the bulletin board, talked to some of my
professors, former professors, and sought their
advice as to what I could do. One of the jobs that was
posted was a faculty position at West Texas State
University. After discussing various
possibilities with one of my major professors, I
decided that I would apply for the job at West Texas
State. I went home and told my father about it, and
he said, well, that's where Tillman spent most of
his life, your cousin. I did not at that time know
Tillman Moore very well, except just to hear of
him. because he was not in Bryan that much and had
always lived away. But at the time, he was in San
Antonio working for the US Air Force. That was
about the extent of my knowledge. I contacted
Cousin Tillman and told him that I was applying for
a job at West Texas State. I've always believed
that he contacted some of his old contacts up there
who were students of his at the time and now were
some of the top administrators in the university
and may have had some bearing on my being able to be
so accepted at West Texas State. I don't know what
he did, but I suspect he at least made one or two
calls.
I spent a very memorable year at West Texas State. I
developed a curriculum for their dairy courses
and began, spent most of my time beginning the
operation of a dairy farm. The dairy farm had not
been operated there since my cousin left back in
the 40s. And there was some reluctance to start it
up again, but if they wanted to have an agriculture
program, they felt like they needed a dairy. So
that was my first charge, was to finish building
the facilities. And the cattle had been
purchased, but to get those cattle into the milk
barn and start the operation up. This was quite a
challenge for a young man, 21 years of age, and also
having to develop a course curriculum at the same
time. I had been attending an all-male college,
and it was quite a different experience to be in a
co-ed college. And it was a great temptation on me
to date some of the co-eds. I decided at first that I
would date only seniors since they were more my
age. Well, it didn't take long until I had run
through the senior class and began to date some of
the young ladies that were in the lower classes.
One of the people that I had a date with had a
roommate.
I didn't know at the time who her roommate was, but I
found out later it was someone that I had always
admired on the campus, but knew that she was going
steady with one of my students. So I never thought
about dating her. But because of the fact that my
roommate was going home one weekend and I had to
line up a date for a friend who was coming in I asked
her if she could line up her roommate. She said,
yes, she could. And that was accomplished. In the
meantime, she went home. I ended up asking the
roommate out. And since then, we have married
shortly after that and have had 44 wonderful
years. Her name was... Cecile, but everybody knew
her as Mickey McCoy from Dalhart, Texas. And
shortly after, while all this was taking place, in
the meantime, I had been called to active duty in
San Antonio, where TM was a high-ranking civilian
at Randolph Air Force Base. I was to report to
Lackland Air Force Base. And a few days before I had
to report in, we were married and moved to San
Antonio. One of the first things I did, of course,
was contact my cousin, T.M. Moore, and he was
delighted to hear from me and hear all about West
Texas State and took great pride in being able to
help in any way he could. I told him what was
available. In the Air Force, of course, he was
familiar with this because he worked for the Air
Force and was director of curriculum and
materials for the Crew Training Air Force. One of
the Crew Training Air Force bases was Tyndall Air
Force Base, where they taught trained aircraft
controllers. I told him about this program, and he
encouraged me to seek it. So I made an application
and was accepted into that program. And shortly
thereafter, we moved to Florida, Panama City,
Florida. And I was to go to school at Tyndall Air
Force Base and learn to become an aircraft
controller. I really didn't know much about what
an aircraft controller did until I got there, but
found out that they get very bad assignments to
remote sites where they were to try to detect any
hostile aircraft that might be coming in and
direct our own aircraft to intercept them by the
use of radar.
The unfortunate part about it was not the
challenge of the job but the locations that these
radar sites were where they were situated.
Most of the good assignments were overseas, but
those had been pretty much depleted by the time I
got there, and the assignments that were coming
through were not good at all. On one of the trips
that my cousin Tillman made to Florida to visit the
base with the commanding general, We had dinner
together. He asked me how it was going. I explained
to him my plight. He suggested that the next day I go
over and apply to stay there as an instructor at the
school. Well, there were no positions as an
instructor at the school and had not been for
several years. But, lo and behold, when the sign
was came down from my graduating class, there were
two slots. for instructors there at the school.
Since I was the only one that had applied, I got one
of those slots. I'm sure that Tillman had the
commanding general place that slot in the school
since
those had to be assigned by the commanding general
that Tillman traveled with so much and was very
close to Those were memorable years in many ways.
We lived on the beach, Mexico Beach, for the first
year and decided that it was a little bit too far
from everything out there. We were about 15 miles
from Port St. Joe. There was not anything at Port
St. Joe except a paper mill and a drive-in movie.
And we were about the same distance from Hadamard
City. We decided we needed to be closer in, so we
moved into Panama City, Florida. The housing on
the base was impossible to secure, and so we
decided that we could actually live more within
our means, which was very meager by living in
Panama City in an apartment.
As I said, one of the slots was for the aircraft
controller school there. And I was serving in that
slot. And after a few months, I was directed to meet
with Major Horowitz, who was in command of a very
small school called the Ground Observer Corps
Instructor Training School. This is where
they... trained the plane spotters, civilians
mostly, to spot any enemy planes that might come
into the United States. And they were observation
towers throughout the country at that time. The
difference was that this was more of a classroom, a
lecture situation as opposed to a pupil coach
arrangement that I had been working in as an
aircraft controller.
This, I thought, was a good experience, a good
chance, and so when the major offered me the
position, I took it. I immediately started
teaching such courses as news writing, public
speaking, the threat of the Soviet Union, and
various subjects that, frankly, I knew very
little about. But as the major said, you can learn
enough to teach one hour course in that subject.
These were all courses that led to my development
and background experience that I later use when I
ran for public office. One of the things that I
learned to do after teaching hundreds of hours of
it over and over again was how to write a news story.
I had to write a number of news stories and always
wrote my own when I was campaigning
and serving in the legislature.
Without that experience, I'm sure that things
would have been quite differently over the years.
Upon completion of my two-year stint in the Air
Force, all of it being either in the aircraft
controller school or the ground observer core
instructor training program there at Tyndall Air
Force Base, I returned to Brian with the home to
enter graduate school at Texas A&M. At the time, we
did not have a place to live and the best housing was
some graduate housing that had a long waiting list
on the south end of the campus. I knew that about the
long waiting list, So I called my cousin, who was
then a senator, Bob Baker, RW Baker, and asked him
if he could help. And within hours, we had an
apartment in that graduate housing. We lived
there for two years and had a very memorable
experience. Our first son had been born, and he
enjoyed his first few years in that graduate
housing along with some of the friends that we've
made for life while living in that particular
project. Those houses have since been destroyed.
They were built back in the Depression days and
provided housing for those kids that otherwise
could not have attended Texas A&M. Later they were
made into graduate student housing.
In graduate school, I decided that I would
concentrate on dairy genetics. This is something
that had fascinated me in undergraduate school.
And I was told that I would need to take more math, so
I went back and took a freshman trigonometry
course. which I did not get credit for, but it was
something that I needed to do. I should have taken
both the trigonometry and calculus, but I was
permitted to not take the calculus courses before
entering some of the programs and courses in
statistics that led to my master's degree.
Meantime, went through the graduate program as a
graduate assistant. I was a research assistant
and did my research in heritability of
milk fat and using the herd
records at the Texas prison system in Huntsville.
We had an opportunity to visit the prison system
several times, interact with prisoners that were
trustees, of course, and some of the more
interesting experiences and memorable
experiences were some of those visits to the Texas
prison system. Little did I know that years later I
would be presiding over the budget of the prison
system. As I was completing my work toward a
master's degree, I began to think about what I
wanted to do, and my brother-in-law contacted me
and suggested that we come to the Valley and
consider going into the dairy business with him.
we went to the valley, considered that as a
possibility, but decided against it for a number
of reasons. But at any rate, we got back home, and my
father said, if you want a dairy, why don't you take
over the dairy here?
Because he was ready to retire, and he could not
retire because of the earned income from the dairy
if he maintained ownership. This seemed like a
logical solution. We liked the area and wanted to
stay here in the Brazos County area, so we decided
to pursue that and took over the operation of the
dairy while we were still living in graduate
housing. In the meantime, I was switched over to a
teaching assistantship and taught some
laboratory courses at Texas A&M during my last
semester here. I had to get out of the graduate
housing, so we began to build a home on the farm and
completed that home just in time to make the move to
the country and start operating the dairy.
Shortly after that, we started building a new
dairy barn one that would not be such a
back-breaking work, and completed that barn and
began to upgrade the cattle, increase the numbers
to some extent, and try to make it a paying
proposition.
In the process of all this, about 1962, my
cousin decided that he had served long enough in
the state senate and decided to run for lieutenant
governor. My oldest brother was his state
campaign manager. I thought very little of it. Of
course, I was going to help my cousin any way I
could, but I thought that meant just voting for
him. Shortly after the campaign had hardly begun,
when I got a call from my brother, saying that he
could not get to Brian and they were having a
campaign rally or a political rally. Would I
attend and read off some of the material that was in
the campaign brochures of my cousins and
represent him in that way? I said, sure, I can do
that. I've had public speaking experience as a
faculty member and as an Air Force instructor. So I
attended my first political rally as a speaker in
62, and that one was just the beginning. There were
about 12 or 13 more rallies that were held, and I
ended up attending each one of them. and
representing my cousin as in his quest for
Lieutenant Governor. There were five people in
the race. The Speaker of the House was running and
then four state senators. The two that emerged in
the runoff was the Speaker of the House and State
Senator by the name of Preston Smith. Preston
Smith went on to win that race and then basically
became governor while I was in the legislature.
They said that was a very close race and one that my
cousin could have won very easily, but he had a very
productive life in the banking profession,
primarily years later, so it probably all worked
out for the best.
Shortly after the campaign, I decided that I
needed to do something other than dairy. And so I
hired some extra help and went to work at Texas A&M
as a tactical officer. This was in 1962. I was still
dairying, but felt like that I needed some farm
employment to subsidize the farm operation. The
very next year, the positions were eliminated
with the exception of three positions. I
maintained one of those three positions. They
changed our name, changed our title to
counselors, but we were still doing about the same
thing as we did before. There were just less of us,
and we were supported by military officers in what
we were doing and working with the Corps of Cadets.
In the meantime, about those early 60s, I became
the charter president of the Bryan Young Farmers
and later became a state vice president and was on
the state executive committee. This was a good
experience and led to my being named the runner-up
outstanding young farmer of Texas by the Texas
JC's in 1966. So there were quite a few accolades
and honors that helped me in overcoming my shyness
and gave me
some self-esteem. And with the other experiences
that I had had, when the opportunity presented
itself in 1967,
that the state representative had moved out of the
area and would not be running for re-election, I
decided to make the race.
I checked on the rules and regulations and
policies of the Texas A&M University system as I
was employed by A&M. I knew that there would be some
restrictions. I found that I could not announce
until after I resigned from my position as a
civilian counselor in the Commandant's office.
So I wanted to wait as long as I could so that I could
maintain my salaried position. In the meantime,
November 1967, a Madisonville city councilman
announced that he was going to run for state
representative. And that caused the pressure to
mount to make some kind of statement. But I held off
until after Christmas. And then in January, I let
it be known that I would be announcing later in the
month. And that got me around that provision of
having to resign. And I was able to serve at least
stay on the payroll through January. I did not know
a lot about serving the state representative, but
my oldest brother had served before and urged me to
consider it.
He said that it would take very little time, and he
was right at first, but after you stay a while, it
takes a great deal of time. One of my first contacts
was with the assistant to the president, and I told
him that what I was thinking about doing, and I felt
like that I should talk to the president of the A&M
and the other system, Earl Rutter. He set up an
appointment for me, and I went and interviewed
with Mr. Rutter, told him what my intentions were.
He suggested I go talk to Buddy Williams, who was
the county Democratic chairman. That had not
occurred to me, but certainly seemed like a good
idea. But he was somewhat encouraging, and so one
thing led to another, and I was off and running. It
was a
interesting experience, one that I'll always
cherish. A lot of hard work and a lot of
organization. And a lot of things that I had
experienced previously were helpful to me in
getting it done. One thing was all the kinfolks I
had. Secondly was the good publicity that I'd had
and the good name of the entire family certainly
helped a great deal.
At that time, the state representative district
was composed of three counties, Brazos, Grimes,
and Madison counties. I ended up with, as I said, an
opponent from Madison County. He was a city
councilman. And two others from Brazos County
were running. One was a student, a Texas A&M, very
active in the young Democrats. And the other was a
chiropractor. There were no Republicans. These
were all Democrats. In fact, Republicans cast
less than 200 votes in the primary at that time and
were really not a factor at all. They were very
seldom feeling anybody at the local level. One of
the things I needed since I lived in the country was
an office in the Bryan College Station area. I had
the good fortune to contact Dr. Howard Carville,
who I had known for many years, and he had just
vacated some space on Texas Avenue. And the good
visible spot with parking in front, and he agreed
to let me have space for my campaign office.
Another big break I had was the bank that I had been
doing business with for some years had never
gotten involved in political races. The other
bank was known for its involvement in races and I
had very little contact there, and my opponent in
Madisonville had excellent connections there,
and I'm sure they were supporting him, although
they never would say for sure who they were
supporting.
local bank contacted me and said they wanted to be
active for the first time and that they wanted to
support me. I was elated and began to realize that I
needed someone to raise a few local bucks, dollars
to make the raise. And when they asked me what they
could do, I said, do you have anybody that can
service my finance chairman? They said, well, who
do you want? I told them I'd like to have their vice
president, and they said fine. The competing bank
was not happy with this at all and suggested I had
made a terrible mistake in involving that bank. I
remember in my dilemma as to what to do, I called on
the state senator at that time, Bill Moore, and his
advice in so many words was take any help you can
get. I remember the bank vice president kept all
donations at $100, said no one can give more than
$100. Of course, not many people in this area were
going to give more than $100 anyway, so that was not
a real problem.
I visited with my cousin in Houston. He put me in
contact with some people that provided some good
advice and good contacts, and I'm sure some little
financial support as time went on. In addition to
that, I remember one of the advices that a lobbyist
gave me in Houston was he had been defeated as state
representative, and he said the reason he was
defeated is that he had not worked his strengths,
that he was weak in one part of his senatorial or
representative district. He had spent too much
time there instead of working where he was strong.
And I remembered that and tried to
include that thinking into my plans as the
campaign moved along. Some other fortunate
breaks I had, I had a neighbor who was in the labor
movement, and he offered to help even though he
knew that I would be rather conservative, more
conservative than the labor unions would prefer.
But he helped introduce me to some of the minority
leadership, both in the black community and the
Hispanic community, and the fact that he was
supporting me influenced them to support me as
well. In addition to that, my father was well known
in the black community because many of those had
been sharecroppers that we talked about earlier.
And my father had always been quite generous and
understanding in dealing with these people. And
the children, many of them were then just young
people that were living out there on my
grandfather's farm. But they remembered the
kindnesses that my father had shown, and that
certainly was an influence.
So we got good support from the minorities, even
though we did not carry those areas. We did not get
swamped or overwhelmed by the young Democrat who
was running in that part of town. He espoused a
liberal philosophy and thought he was going to
carry those minority boxes heavily, but it turned
out that he either did not carry them at all or
carried them by a very slim margin, and I'm sure
that was a factor. Another factor in that first
race was that Grimes County was in the district and
was heavily involved in the dairy industry. There
were probably 150 to 175 dairies at the time, And
the dairy industry people were very close, and I
was one of them. And that gave me some good
contacts, gave me a good inroad with those people.
And as a result of that and working Brazos County
and doing just a token amount of work in Madison
County, remembering what This lobbyist had told
me don't quirk your weaknesses, and certainly
Madison County would be a weakness because I was
running against a fair-haired boy from Madison
County. I was almost won without a runoff. I needed
67 votes to avoid a runoff. This was the only runoff
I ever had three weeks later. And it meant that we
had to spend some more money and time in securing
that race. The race incident cost about $4,000. We
paid off all of it without going into debt. But in
the process, I had to use about $1,600 that I had
accumulated toward my retirement at Texas A&M. I
had withdrawn those funds and spent them on the
race.
After the primary was over, I really wanted to get
back to work if I could. So I called a friend of mine
here and said, can I get my old job back? I don't
remember when the election actually is. He
checked out the law and said yes, that I could. And
so I immediately reported back to work in the
commandant's office. After being employed there
three days, I got a call that President Rutter
wanted to see me. I went to his office, and he
suggested that I would be kind of wasting my time
down there, that he would refer that like for me to
move to the budget office and learn all about the
budgets of the A&M system. and that in the process
he would like to get me off of the state payroll and
put me on a private payroll. This was fine with me as
long as I got paid. And so the next few months I sat
through the budget reviews and preparation for
the legislative session and had a firsthand view
of how the process works. Mr. Rudder was unusual
person. He was most thoughtful leader I have ever
been around and had a tremendous ability to lead.
And he taught me something about decision making
that I will always carry with me. And I had to learn
to admire his integrity and his ability to lead
during those few months that I spent in his office
as we reviewed the budgets.
Finally, we had the opportunity to meet a few
members of the legislature, but not that many. I
remember one of the first ones that I saw had just
been elected as lieutenant governor. His name was
Ben Barnes. And when I saw him, we were standing
face to face just so suddenly that I stuck out my
hand and I said, I'm Ben Barnes. And I'm sure he got a
chuckle out of that. But him being magnanimous, as
he always was and is, called me by name, by first
name, and said he was glad that I would be in the
legislature and had looked forward to meeting
you. And we appreciated that. One of the things
that always helped was the congressional name was
well known because my brother had been lobbying in
the halls of the Capitol for almost 30 years, or 20
years, excuse me, 20 years. And as a result, the
name was well known and well respected. The people
that my brother had served with, of course, had all
moved on by the time I got to the legislature
because we followed each other by, I followed him
by for some 20 years.
This is the end of Chapter 3. I will begin Chapter 4
on the next stage.